Ksmsharding (#2710)
elastic/elastic-agent: docs/elastic-agent-ksm-sharding.md

# Elastic Agent Manifests in order to support Kube-State-Metrics Sharding

Kube-state-metrics (KSM) library provides [horizontal sharding](https://github.com/kubernetes/kube-state-metrics#horizontal-sharding) in order to support large kubernetes deployments. As Elastic-Agent collection from kube-state-metrics is proved to be resource intensive, we need to be able to support such horizontal scaling scenarios with our configuration. This doc aims to provide information on how to configure Elastic Agent with KSM horizontally sharded.

> *IMPORTANT*: Please review the relevant [Scaling Elastic Agent in Kubernetes document](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/fleet/master/scaling-on-kubernetes.html) before you continue. The documentation explains in more details why and how we concluded in the below configurations.

Author: Yes I am waiting this and finally will merge the https://github.com/elastic/ingest-docs/pull/203.
This is where the scaling-on-kubernetes.html comes from

## Kube State Metrics Configuration

Deploy kube-state metrics with autosharding (by default number of replicas is 2)

```bash
git clone https://github.com/kubernetes/kube-state-metrics
cd kube-state-metrics/examples/autosharding 
kubectl apply -k .
```

The default dns entries for to access created ksm pods are (assuming namespace of installation of KSM remains default: `kube-system`):

- **KSM Shard01:** kube-state-metrics-0.kube-state-metrics.kube-system.svc.cluster.local:8080
- **KSM Shard02:** kube-state-metrics-1.kube-state-metrics.kube-system.svc.cluster.local:8080

> ## Installation methods of elastic-agent

Author: Updated them: [8099db9](https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2710/commits/8099db9d72fd97dff35d1d375605ba2fbeac5fee)

> ## Installation methods of elastic-agent

Author: updated @ablnk , misunderstood your comment. Kept installations

> This document suggests **the 4 alternative configuration methods** to deploy elastic-agent in big scale Kubernetes clusters with KSM in sharding configuration. In general, we split the agent installation. We use a `daemonset Leader Elastic Agent` that collects both node-wide metrics and Kubernetes API Server metrics and `deployment (or statefuleset) Elastic Agents` that collect metrics from the different KSM Shard endpoints.

Author: Leftover fixed in [8099db9](https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2710/commits/8099db9d72fd97dff35d1d375605ba2fbeac5fee)

```yaml
spec: 
  nodeName: gke-kubernetes-scale-kubernetes-scale-0f73d58f-8cz4
```

5. Deploy your manifests:

    ```bash
    kubectl apply -f elastic-agent-managed-daemonset-ksm-0.yaml
    kubectl apply -f elastic-agent-managed-deployment-ksm-1.yaml
    ```

```bash
 kubectl get pods -n kube-system| grep elastic
elastic-agent-2jw86                                              1/1     Running   0          4m33s
elastic-agent-56cfc5759-7bmz7                                    1/1     Running   0          4m11s     < This is the deployment Agent
elastic-agent-65f59                                              1/1     Running   0          4m33s
elastic-agent-8j9t6                                              1/1     Running   0          4m33s
elastic-agent-b5mgk                                              1/1     Running   0          4m33s
elastic-agent-fn5tt                                              1/1     Running   0          4m33s
elastic-agent-g4m92                                              1/1     Running   0          4m33s
elastic-agent-h4wbc                                              1/1     Running   0          4m33s

> kubectl get pod -n kube-system elastic-agent-56cfc5759-7bmz7 -o jsonpath='{.spec.nodeName}'

Author: Done

# Elastic Agent Manifests in order to support Kube-State-Metrics Sharding

> Kube-state-metrics (KSM) project provides [horizontal sharding](https://github.com/kubernetes/kube-state-metrics#horizontal-sharding) in order to support large kubernetes deployments. As Elastic-Agent collection from kube-state-metrics is proved to be resource intensive, we need to be able to support such horizontal scaling scenarios with our configuration. This doc aims to provide information on how to configure Elastic Agent with KSM horizontally sharded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kube-state-metrics (KSM) project provides [horizontal sharding](https://github.com/kubernetes/kube-state-metrics#horizontal-sharding) in order to support large kubernetes deployments. Elastic-Agent collection from kube-state-metrics has been proven to be resource intensive and we support KSM horizontal scaling scenarios with our configuration. This doc aims to provide information on how to configure Elastic Agent with KSM horizontally sharded.
```

## Kube State Metrics Configuration

Deploy kube-state metrics with autosharding (by default number of replicas is 2)

```bash
git clone https://github.com/kubernetes/kube-state-metrics
cd kube-state-metrics/examples/autosharding 
kubectl apply -k .
```

The default dns entries for to access created ksm pods are (assuming namespace of installation of KSM remains default: `kube-system`):

- **KSM Shard01:** kube-state-metrics-0.kube-state-metrics.kube-system.svc.cluster.local:8080
- **KSM Shard02:** kube-state-metrics-1.kube-state-metrics.kube-system.svc.cluster.local:8080

## Installation methods of elastic-agent

This document suggests **3 alternative configuration methods** to deploy elastic-agent in big scale Kubernetes clusters with KSM in sharding configuration:

1. With `hostNetwork:false` for non-leader deployments of KSM shards
2. With `podAntiAffinity` to isolate the daemonset pods from rest of deployments
3. With `taint/tolerations` to isolate the daemonset pods from rest of deployments

Each configuration includes specific pros and cons and users may choose what best matches their needs.

> The Kubernetes observability is based on https://docs.elastic.co/en/integrations/kubernetes[kubernetes integration], which is fetching metrics from several components:

Reviewer 2: This link is broken. Was it supposed to be:

```suggestion
The Kubernetes observability is based on [kubernetes integration](https://docs.elastic.co/en/integrations/kubernetes), which is fetching metrics from several components:
```

 kubectl apply -f elastic-agent-managed-daemonset.yaml
```

> **Note:** : Order of deploying manifests is important. You need first to install deployments and then daemonset, otherwise deployments will not find a node available for scheduling.

> **Note**: Above manifests exist under [manifests/affinty](./manifests/affinty) folder

Verify installation:

```bash
❯ kgp -A | grep elastic
kube-system   elastic-agent-64ctk                                              1/1     Running   0          4m44s
kube-system   elastic-agent-8db69556b-6t4qv                                    1/1     Running   0          4m48s
kube-system   elastic-agent-cj2zk                                              1/1     Running   0          4m44s
kube-system   elastic-agent-rlnqk                                              1/1     Running   0          4m44s
kube-system   elastic-agent-tt5lg                                              1/1     Running   0          4m44s
kube-system   elastic-agent-txxfp                                              0/1     Pending   0          4m44s
```

> **Note:**: Elastic agent from deployment has a different naming, eg. `elastic-agent-8db69556b-6t4qv`

**Pros/Cons**:

> - [+] You **can* prevent execution of deployments in nodes where agents already running.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [+] You *can* prevent execution of deployments in nodes where agents already running.
```

- [-] More complex than first method
- [-] It displays scheduled daemonset pods in state `Pending` where antiaffinity is triggered.

### Tolerations Installation

**Agent Policies:**
For this installation, users need to configure the same agent policies as described in first scenario (aka hostnetwork configuration).

- Daemonset resources will include the leader ksm and apiserver.
  ![Deployment policy in tolerations config](./images/tolerationsksm0.png)
  
  ![Deployment policy in tolerations config](./images/tolerationsdaemonset.png)

- **One Agent Policy per KSM shard URL endpoint needs to be assigned to a different deployment**
  - a) Leader Election should be disabled in all deployments

**Manifest Installation:**

1. Revert any changes from previous scenarios. Make sure that `hostNetwork:true` in [elastic-agent-managed-deployment-ksm-1.yaml](./manifests/kubernetes_deployment_ksm-1.yaml#40). This option is not needed anymore and can be reverted in this scenario. Also verify that  `affinity` block is commented.

> 2. Uncomment the following `toleration` in  manifest[elastic-agent-managed-deployment-ksm-1.yaml](./manifests/tolerations/elastic-agent-managed-deployment-ksm-1.yaml). Only the deployments need to include tolerations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Uncomment the following `toleration` in manifest [elastic-agent-managed-deployment-ksm-1.yaml](./manifests/tolerations/elastic-agent-managed-deployment-ksm-1.yaml). Only the deployments need to include tolerations
```

   ```bash
    tolerations:
        - key: "deployment"
            operator: "Equal"
            value: "yes"
            effect: "NoSchedule"
   ```

3. Taint a specific node that you want to exclude from being assigned to daemonset pods

    ```bash
    kubectl taint nodes gke-kubernetes-scale-kubernetes-scale-0f73d58f-4rt9 deployment=yes:NoSchedule
    ```

4. Deploy your manifests:

    ```bash
    kubectl apply -f elastic-agent-managed-daemonset-ksm-0.yaml
    kubectl apply -f elastic-agent-managed-deployment-ksm-1.yaml
    ```

> **Note**: Above manifests exist under [manifests/tolerations](./manifests/tolerations) folder

**Pros/Cons**:

> - [+] You **can* prevent execution of deployments in nodes where agents already running

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [+] You *can* prevent execution of deployments in nodes where agents already running
```
